The month of entertaining international football is over, with new world champions crowned in Argentina. Now, the order of play is back on domestic football, which means in England, the Premier League is back!

The first half of the season brought excitement and unpredictability. Could the second half be more of the same?

Here we bring you our Premier League season review for the first half of the 2022/23 campaign, and we look ahead to the rest of the season and predict how things could shape up.

First half season overview
The Premier League so far this season has been hugely entertaining. There is a new team dominating at the top, while a side who has been one of the most successful in England and Europe over the last few years have been struggling.

The newly promoted sides have been having mixed fortunes, with the one who has been bouncing between the Prem and the Championship doing the best, the one who has been a way for a little while doing slightly worse, and the one who hadn’t been at this level for over 20 years has been struggling.


There are a few disappointments here and there, teams who were believed to be a lot better than how they have been so far. And then there are those who have been exceeding expectations.

Overall, the Prem this year has been very fun to watch, and you never quite know what’s going to happen each weekend.

With the league back and the Christmas round of fixtures complete, we have a good view of how things could carry on for the rest of the year.

Top of the table
There have been many surprises already in the first half of the season, none more so than the team who sits at the top of the table.

After many years of struggles and rebuilding, Arsenal have finally found themselves back at the top. After two consecutive busy summer transfer windows in the last couple of years, Mikel Arteta has finally built himself a squad he knows how to work with, and they find themselves the ones to beat now.


Reigning champions Manchester City have been strong too, and with the help of new signing Erling Haaland who is proving to be a smash hit (20 goals in 14 games), they are chasing down the Gunners.

But they’re not the only ones, as Newcastle have taken massive steps up the table and find themselves in the top four - a stark contrast to the dead bottom of the table they found themselves at just 12 months ago.

They have been one of the strongest teams in the league, conceding the least amount of goals so far (11) and matching Arsenal for the least number of defeats with just the one.


Two teams that have been somewhat quietly good this year are Tottenham and Manchester United. They are making the most of Liverpool and Chelsea vastly underperforming so far, and find themselves in fourth and fifth place respectively.

Speaking of Liverpool, it's fair to say that there probably isn’t a single person in the world who thought they wouldn’t be in the title fight at this point, but here they are with 25 points and sitting in sixth place.

Chelsea have also struggled, sitting in eighth place, which isn’t good enough for any European competition for next season (unless they were to win the Champions League this year).

Early relegation battle
Life for some teams has not been so sweet thus far. Newly promoted Nottingham Forest have found that spending a lot in the summer doesn’t equal success. They are currently in the bottom three and it's difficult to see a way out for them.

Another team looking to be in big trouble is Southampton. After a decent start that saw a victory over Chelsea, they have failed to pick up a single point in their last four games and have failed to win a game since October.


After sacking Ralph Hassenhuttl shortly before the World Cup break, there was hope that their new manager, Nathan Jones, could work with the team to take them forward. But instead, their first game back was a poor loss to Brighton and they now sit at the bottom of the league, with their future looking rather bleak.

Ever since Nuno Espirito Santo left Wolves, they haven’t quite been the same. But this year has been terrible. They have only just risen off the bottom of the table, but still find themselves in the relegation zone, somewhere they could still be by the end of the season.

Everton narrowly escaped relegation last year, and they may have to do the same this year as they continue to struggle, currently sitting in 17th.


A surprise towards the bottom end is West Ham, who in recent years were experiencing a resurgence and looked like they could start to work their way into the top ranks. That has not been the case, though, as this year they have dropped completely and find themselves just one point above the drop zone.

Leeds are another side that struggled last year, escaping the drop to the Championship remarkably in the final game of the season. With the way things are looking, they may end up doing the same again this year.

Predictions for the rest of the year
Looking ahead to the rest of the year, it is hard to predict exactly what will happen. Things change rapidly in the Prem, so where the teams are right now may not be where they will be in even a month’s time.

But we’ll start with our predictions for the teams to go down, as two seem fairly certain to predict unless they have strong January transfer windows and bring in big help.

Southampton seems a bit lost at the moment. That may be the adjustment period with the new manager, but currently the signs are pointing to further struggles. It’s hard to see them escape this year.


Nottingham Forest also look like they aren’t quite ready for the Premier League challenge, and as such the Championship may be calling once more. We have them joining the Saints to go down.

As for the third team, it's hard to say exactly as it really could be any of the four teams hovering just above the drop zone (Everton, West Ham, Leeds and Bournemouth).

At the top of the table, we would love to see Arsenal continuing as they have done. They have been brilliant this year and very deserving of the top spot. In their first game back, they scored a brilliant 3-1 victory over West Ham and looked as though they never went away.


But Man City will be hunting them down. They’re only five points behind, and knowing them, a slip up is unlikely. Pep Guardiola’s men will be ready in case the Gunners do, and if they do, the Cityzen’s will pounce.

And we can’t disrespect Newcastle and count them out. They are the best performing team in the league currently, and haven’t lost in 11 games while currently on a six-game winning streak. If somehow both Arsenal and City slip up, Newcastle could find themselves surprise Premier League champions.

However, we will give the nod to Arsenal based on how strong they have looked and how unlikely they look to slip up at any point.

Premier League hospitality



Images (L-R): Arsenal's Executive Box, Crystal Palace's Legends Restaurant, and Liverpool's hospitality lounge
If you’re looking to treat yourself to any games this season - maybe there’s a special occasion for a loved one or yourself, or you want to experience a highly anticipated match in the best way possible - then you’ll want to go for a premium hospitality package.

Every Premier League side has their own hospitality packages with brilliant benefits to provide an unforgettable matchday experience. Things that are shared between each teams’ packages are:

Access to the stadium from the dedicated hospitality entrance
Access to one of the stadium’s premium hospitality lounge (the lounge will depend on the chosen package)
Delectable food and drinks provided
A comfortable padded seat in a prime area with the best views of all the action on the pitch


Images (L-R): Manchester City's Tunnel Club and Tottenham's Stratus Lounge
Each teams’ hospitality packages are different and there are multiple to choose from for each team. Some offer incredible experiences with amazing access, such as Man City’s Tunnel Club.

We advise you to take your time checking out your teams’ hospitality options, or any teams’ options for that matter, with Seat Unique, so you can find the best package for you!




